dev-notes/TODO-64bit.md, before:

## TODO list for 64-bit migration

### Design questions

On 32-bit machines, we currently have `Int31.int` as the default integer type, `Int32.int`
as a boxed integer type, and `Int64.int` represented as a pair of integers.
The plan is to make `Int63.int` the default integer type on 64-bit machines, with `Int32.int`
as an *unboxed* type and `Int64.int` as a regular boxed type without the special representation.
Currently we use the default tagged integer type for all smaller integer types
(*e.g.*, `Int8.int` is represented as `Int31.int` at runtime).

From the point of view of the compiler, there are three properties of integer types
that we might want to track:

1. the number of bits of precision (we have been using `0` for arbitrary precision)

2. the number of bits in the representation (currently types smaller than the default
   tagged type are represented using the default tagged type)

3. is the type signed (with overflow checking) or unsigned?

4. is the type boxed or unboxed?

The last of these properties is ignored until CPS and code generation.

### Compiler issues

All paths are relative the the `base` module.

* The `RK_I32BLOCK` constructor in the `CPS.record_kind` datatype should be generalized
  to allow for 64-bits.  It is used for literals, boxed 32-bit values, and for 32-bit
  values in closures.  The best idea might be to merge it with the `RK_FBLOCK`
  constructor to define a `RK_RAW` record kind that can hold floats (both 32 and 64-bit)
  and 32 or 64-bit integers.</br>
  **Note:** that the `RAW_RECORD` primop, which is used for C interface support (nlffi)
  is translated to `RK_I32BLOCK`.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/ppcps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/main/literals.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/closure.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* The `ObjectDesc.tag_raw32` value is used to tag `RK_I32BLOCK` records.  The runtime
  currently has both raw 32-bit and raw 64-bit header tags, but their meaning would be
  somewhat dependent on the word size (it is not clear that we even need `tag_raw32`
  on a 64-bit machine).  While the `tag_raw32` value is only used in a couple of places,
  it is mentioned in comments in several files.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml` (comment)
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/object-desc.sig`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/object-desc.sml`
    - `compiler/ElabData/prim/primop.sig` (comment)
    - `compiler/ElabData/prim/primop.sml` (comment)
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/Unsafe/object.sml` (numeric value used in `rep`)
    - `system/smlnj/init/core.sml` (numeric value used in `polyequal`)

* The `Word64.word` and `Int64.int` types are currently implemented by conversion
  to pairs of `Word32.word` values in the translation from Absyn to PLambda.  The
  actual implementation of 64-bit arithmetic is in SML and uses the `CVT64` primop
  to support the conversion.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/literal-to-num.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-int64.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-word64.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  Change `SMLGCType` to have tagged and native integer types, instead of `I31` and `I32`.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sig`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  Add `amd64` as an architecture that CM knows about<br/>
  Files:
    - `cm/main/specific-symval-fn.sml`

* **[dbm]**
  The assumption that 31-bit integers are the default `int` type is
  pervasive in the primitive operations.  A major example of this
  assumption are the primitive operations for converting between integer
  representations.  We should change the names of these operations to
  use `word`/`int` instead of `w31`/`i31`, etc.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/Semant/prim/primop-bindings.sml`

* The `Word8` operations are currently being implemented using special
  renamed versions of the `Int31` primitive operations (*e.g.*, `i31add_8`).
  This implementation is consistent with the current strategy of implementing
  smaller integer sizes (*e.g.*, bytes) as the default tagged integer type,
  but we might want to push the actual size info through the compiler to
  enable range-based optimizations.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/DEVNOTES/Primops/primop-list`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/primopmap.sml`
    - `compiler/Semant/prim/primop-bindings.sml`

* **[DONE**
  For the 64-bit target, the `Int32.int` type can be represented as an unboxed
  tagged integer.  This means that the CPS `i32wrap` and `i32unwrap` operations
  should be generalized in some way.<br/>
  **Note:** there are existing CPS operations `iwrap` and `iunwrap` defined, but
  they are not implemented in the code generator and it is unclear what purpose
  they serve.  Perhaps they should be the generic boxing operations?</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cpstrans.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/ppcps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/cps-split.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/limit.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/memAliasing.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/memDisambig.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/spill-new.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The FLINT primitive types have 31 and 32-bit integer types (`PT_INT31` and `PT_INT32`)
  as well as a mapping from `Types.tycon` to FLINT `primtyc`.</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/kernel/primtyc.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/kernel/primtyc.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The conversion from PLambda to FLINT has a 31-bit assumption
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/flintnm.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The representation of FLINT assumes four kinds of integer literals: `INT`, `INT32`,
  `WORD`, and `WORD32`.  These are reduced to two kinds when converting to CPS (`INT`
  and `INT32`).  The FLINT representation of constructors in switch statements has
  a similar breakdown.  It is not clear if the word vs. int distinction is important
  for FLINT, but we should generalize the names to represent tagged vs. untagged integers
  and use `IntInf.int` to represent the actual values.  We may also want to add a
  size attribute, so that we can support heap-allocated literals (e.g., `Int64.int` on
  32-bit machines or `IntInf.int`) in the future.</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/chkflint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/flint.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/flint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/ppflint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/fcontract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/lift.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/recover.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/chkplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/flintnm.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/plambda.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/plambda.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/pplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/reorder.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/rpplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The `CPS.cty` datatype needs to be extended to include an `INT64t` constant
  (or perhaps an `INTt of int` constructor).<br/>
  **Note:** there is an interaction between this issue and the wrapping/unwrapping
  of 32-bit integers discussed above.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cpstrans.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/infcnv.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/cps-split.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/invokegc.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sml`

* **[DONE]** Support for generating switch code (`do_switch_gen`) assume 32-bit words.<br/>
  Files:
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/switch.sml`

* Code generation from CPS assumes 32-bit words in a number of places.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/invokegc.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/limit.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/spill-new.sml`

* Should the default machine-spec word size be changed to 64?  Also, what (if any)
  relation is there between the `Target` module and the machine specification?<br/>
  Files:
    - `base/compiler/CodeGen/main/machspec.sml`

* The `base/compiler/CodeGen/amd64` code generator will probably need some cleanup,
  since it was written for a pseudo-64-bit implementation.

* **[DONE]**
  To support cross compiling from 32-bit hosts to 64-bit targets, we will need to
  replace fixed-precision representations of literals with IntInf.int.  This change
  has already been made for the CPS representation, but it will also need to be
  done for the FLINT representation, and for some of the CPS-related passes.</br>
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/switch.sml`
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/main/literals.sml`
    - `base/compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]** various 32-bit dependencies in FLINT<br/>
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/pequal.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/matchcomp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/reps/equal.sml`

### MLRISC issues

There are some issues with the current MLRISC support for AMD64.

* The binary instruction encoding in the `amd64.mdl` was never completed

* The instruction selection mechanism in `amd64/mltree/amd64.sml` is based on
  the register-poor `x86`, instead of a RISC-type architecture.  This choice
  may explain the poor floating-point performance for this architecture in
  the Manticore compiler.

### Basis Library issues

* Default integer types: `Int31.int` for 32-bit machines and `Int63.int` for 64-bit
  machines.

* The implementation of `IntInf` assumes 32-bit integers.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/infcnv.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-intinf.sml`

* **[dbm]**
  The `InlineT` module may need to be conditionally compiled based on word size,
  since it has `Int31` and `Word31` submodules.  Furthermore, there are many
  Basis Library modules that use `InlineT.Int31` and `InlineT.Word31` for
  index arithmetic, etc.  We might change these to `Int` and `Word`
  modules that are resolved to 31-bit integers on 32-bit targets and 63-bit
  integers on 64-bit targets (i.e., based on the default integer size).<br/>
  Files:
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-buffer.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/num-scan.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/pack-real64-native.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/pack-real64-swap.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/string.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-buffer.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/built-in.sml`

### Runtime system issues

The runtime system has been 64-bit clean for many years, but it has never been
used for targets where the ML word size is 64-bits, so there could be some
problems.

**[DONE]** To support a 64-bit address space, we will need to implement the multi-level
BIBOP support.  We should probably increase the size of the `BIBOP_PAGE_SZB`
to 256K (18 bits), but we will still need a 2-level table to cover a 48-bit
virtual address space.  An alternative might be some form of hashing. <br/>
*UPDATE* experiments show that the two-level table works best, but we
replace bibop tests in the minor-gc with address-range tests.

Object descriptors can be left as is for now (low 7 bits), which will allow
the length field to support much bigger objects.  We will want to add a
`SEQ_word64` kind tag for vectors/arrays, which will require a change in
runtime representations.

### SML/NJ Library issues

There are a few library modules that assume 32-bit integers.

  * The various hash-table modules round up table size assuming that the
    size is a 31-bit integer.<br/>
    Files:
      - `Util/hash-set-fn.sml`
      - `Util/hash-table-rep.sml`
      - `Util/hash-table.sml`
      - `Util/hash-set-fn.sml`

  * The `Rand` and `Random` modules are 31-bit specific.<br/>
    Files:
      - `Util/rand.sml`
      - `Util/random.sml`

### General discussion

**[DONE]** Ideally, we can devise a single way to parameterize the compiler on target sizes
from front to back.

It would also be nice to address support for 32-bit floats at the same time, since
many of the same parts of the compiler will need to be touched.

Commit message:

Added section for the Basis Library to the 64-bit TODO list
git-svn-id: https://smlnj-gforge.cs.uchicago.edu/svn/smlnj@4859 d172b47e-f5d9-4df3-ab46-1c4da947e531

dev-notes/TODO-64bit.md, after:

## TODO list for 64-bit migration

### Design questions

On 32-bit machines, we currently have `Int31.int` as the default integer type, `Int32.int`
as a boxed integer type, and `Int64.int` represented as a pair of integers.
The plan is to make `Int63.int` the default integer type on 64-bit machines, with `Int32.int`
as an *unboxed* type and `Int64.int` as a regular boxed type without the special representation.
Currently we use the default tagged integer type for all smaller integer types
(*e.g.*, `Int8.int` is represented as `Int31.int` at runtime).

From the point of view of the compiler, there are three properties of integer types
that we might want to track:

1. the number of bits of precision (we have been using `0` for arbitrary precision)

2. the number of bits in the representation (currently types smaller than the default
   tagged type are represented using the default tagged type)

3. is the type signed (with overflow checking) or unsigned?

4. is the type boxed or unboxed?

The last of these properties is ignored until CPS and code generation.

### Compiler issues

All paths are relative the the `base` module.

* The `RK_I32BLOCK` constructor in the `CPS.record_kind` datatype should be generalized
  to allow for 64-bits.  It is used for literals, boxed 32-bit values, and for 32-bit
  values in closures.  The best idea might be to merge it with the `RK_FBLOCK`
  constructor to define a `RK_RAW` record kind that can hold floats (both 32 and 64-bit)
  and 32 or 64-bit integers.</br>
  **Note:** that the `RAW_RECORD` primop, which is used for C interface support (nlffi)
  is translated to `RK_I32BLOCK`.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/ppcps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/main/literals.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/closure.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* The `ObjectDesc.tag_raw32` value is used to tag `RK_I32BLOCK` records.  The runtime
  currently has both raw 32-bit and raw 64-bit header tags, but their meaning would be
  somewhat dependent on the word size (it is not clear that we even need `tag_raw32`
  on a 64-bit machine).  While the `tag_raw32` value is only used in a couple of places,
  it is mentioned in comments in several files.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml` (comment)
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/object-desc.sig`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/object-desc.sml`
    - `compiler/ElabData/prim/primop.sig` (comment)
    - `compiler/ElabData/prim/primop.sml` (comment)
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/Unsafe/object.sml` (numeric value used in `rep`)
    - `system/smlnj/init/core.sml` (numeric value used in `polyequal`)

* The `Word64.word` and `Int64.int` types are currently implemented by conversion
  to pairs of `Word32.word` values in the translation from Absyn to PLambda.  The
  actual implementation of 64-bit arithmetic is in SML and uses the `CVT64` primop
  to support the conversion.<br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/literal-to-num.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-int64.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-word64.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  Change `SMLGCType` to have tagged and native integer types, instead of `I31` and `I32`.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sig`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  Add `amd64` as an architecture that CM knows about<br/>
  Files:
    - `cm/main/specific-symval-fn.sml`

* **[dbm]**
  The assumption that 31-bit integers are the default `int` type is
  pervasive in the primitive operations.  A major example of this
  assumption are the primitive operations for converting between integer
  representations.  We should change the names of these operations to
  use `word`/`int` instead of `w31`/`i31`, etc.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/Semant/prim/primop-bindings.sml`

* The `Word8` operations are currently being implemented using special
  renamed versions of the `Int31` primitive operations (*e.g.*, `i31add_8`).
  This implementation is consistent with the current strategy of implementing
  smaller integer sizes (*e.g.*, bytes) as the default tagged integer type,
  but we might want to push the actual size info through the compiler to
  enable range-based optimizations.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/DEVNOTES/Primops/primop-list`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/primopmap.sml`
    - `compiler/Semant/prim/primop-bindings.sml`

* **[DONE**
  For the 64-bit target, the `Int32.int` type can be represented as an unboxed
  tagged integer.  This means that the CPS `i32wrap` and `i32unwrap` operations
  should be generalized in some way.<br/>
  **Note:** there are existing CPS operations `iwrap` and `iunwrap` defined, but
  they are not implemented in the code generator and it is unclear what purpose
  they serve.  Perhaps they should be the generic boxing operations?</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cpstrans.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/ppcps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/cps-split.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/limit.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/memAliasing.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/memDisambig.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/spill-new.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The FLINT primitive types have 31 and 32-bit integer types (`PT_INT31` and `PT_INT32`)
  as well as a mapping from `Types.tycon` to FLINT `primtyc`.</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/kernel/primtyc.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/kernel/primtyc.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The conversion from PLambda to FLINT has a 31-bit assumption
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/flintnm.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The representation of FLINT assumes four kinds of integer literals: `INT`, `INT32`,
  `WORD`, and `WORD32`.  These are reduced to two kinds when converting to CPS (`INT`
  and `INT32`).  The FLINT representation of constructors in switch statements has
  a similar breakdown.  It is not clear if the word vs. int distinction is important
  for FLINT, but we should generalize the names to represent tagged vs. untagged integers
  and use `IntInf.int` to represent the actual values.  We may also want to add a
  size attribute, so that we can support heap-allocated literals (e.g., `Int64.int` on
  32-bit machines or `IntInf.int`) in the future.</br>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/chkflint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/flint.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/flint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/flint/ppflint.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/fcontract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/lift.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/opt/recover.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/chkplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/flintnm.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/plambda.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/plambda.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/pplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/reorder.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/plambda/rpplexp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`

* **[DONE]**
  The `CPS.cty` datatype needs to be extended to include an `INT64t` constant
  (or perhaps an `INTt of int` constructor).<br/>
  **Note:** there is an interaction between this issue and the wrapping/unwrapping
  of 32-bit integers discussed above.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sig`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cps.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cps/cpstrans.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/contract.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/infcnv.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/clos/cps-split.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/invokegc.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/smlnj-gctype.sml`

* **[DONE]** Support for generating switch code (`do_switch_gen`) assume 32-bit words.<br/>
  Files:
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/convert.sml`
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/switch.sml`

* Code generation from CPS assumes 32-bit words in a number of places.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/cps-c-calls.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/invokegc.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/limit.sml`
    - `compiler/CodeGen/cpscompile/spill-new.sml`

* Should the default machine-spec word size be changed to 64?  Also, what (if any)
  relation is there between the `Target` module and the machine specification?<br/>
  Files:
    - `base/compiler/CodeGen/main/machspec.sml`

* The `base/compiler/CodeGen/amd64` code generator will probably need some cleanup,
  since it was written for a pseudo-64-bit implementation.

* **[DONE]**
  To support cross compiling from 32-bit hosts to 64-bit targets, we will need to
  replace fixed-precision representations of literals with IntInf.int.  This change
  has already been made for the CPS representation, but it will also need to be
  done for the FLINT representation, and for some of the CPS-related passes.</br>
  Files:
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/cps/switch.sml`
    - `base/compiler/FLINT/main/literals.sml`
    - `base/compiler/CodeGen/main/mlriscGen.sml`

* **[DONE]** various 32-bit dependencies in FLINT<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/pequal.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/matchcomp.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/trans/translate.sml`
    - `compiler/FLINT/reps/equal.sml`

### Basis Library issues

* The `CoreIntInf` assumes 32-bit integers and uses many 31-bit-specific primops.
  It also implements functions for converting to/from `Int64.int` (which is represented
  as two 32-bit integers).<br/>
  Files:
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-intinf.sml`

* The `system/smlnj/init/built-in.sml` file needs to have two different versions
  for 32 and 64-bits.  The 32-bit version is missing native 64-bit types.<br/>
  Files:
    - `system/smlnj/init/built-in32.sml` (renamed file)
    - `system/smlnj/init/built-in64.sml` (new file)
    - `system/smlnj/init/init.cmi`

* The `CoreInt64` and `CoreWord64` modules are not needed on 64-bit machines, since
  the native code generator can support the operations.<br/>
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-int64.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-word64.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/pervasive.sml`

* The `polyequal` function in the `Core` structure handles boxed 32-bit values, but not
  boxed 64-bit values.<br/>
    - `system/smlnj/init/core.sml`

* The `system/smlnj/init/pervasive.sml` file assumes 32-bits; it may need two versions
  (like the `built-in.sml` file).

### MLRISC issues

There are some issues with the current MLRISC support for AMD64.

* The binary instruction encoding in the `amd64.mdl` was never completed

* The instruction selection mechanism in `amd64/mltree/amd64.sml` is based on
  the register-poor `x86`, instead of a RISC-type architecture.  This choice
  may explain the poor floating-point performance for this architecture in
  the Manticore compiler.

### Basis Library issues

* Default integer types: `Int31.int` for 32-bit machines and `Int63.int` for 64-bit
  machines.

* The implementation of `IntInf` assumes 32-bit integers.<br/>
  Files:
    - `compiler/FLINT/cpsopt/infcnv.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/core-intinf.sml`

* **[dbm]**
  The `InlineT` module may need to be conditionally compiled based on word size,
  since it has `Int31` and `Word31` submodules.  Furthermore, there are many
  Basis Library modules that use `InlineT.Int31` and `InlineT.Word31` for
  index arithmetic, etc.  We might change these to `Int` and `Word`
  modules that are resolved to 31-bit integers on 32-bit targets and 63-bit
  integers on 64-bit targets (i.e., based on the default integer size).<br/>
  Files:
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-buffer.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/char-vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/num-scan.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/pack-real64-native.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/pack-real64-swap.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/real64.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/string.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-array.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-array-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-buffer.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-vector.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8-vector-slice.sml`
    - `system/Basis/Implementation/word8.sml`
    - `system/smlnj/init/built-in.sml`

### Runtime system issues

The runtime system has been 64-bit clean for many years, but it has never been
used for targets where the ML word size is 64-bits, so there could be some
problems.

**[DONE]** To support a 64-bit address space, we will need to implement the multi-level
BIBOP support.  We should probably increase the size of the `BIBOP_PAGE_SZB`
to 256K (18 bits), but we will still need a 2-level table to cover a 48-bit
virtual address space.  An alternative might be some form of hashing. <br/>
*UPDATE* experiments show that the two-level table works best, but we
replace bibop tests in the minor-gc with address-range tests.

Object descriptors can be left as is for now (low 7 bits), which will allow
the length field to support much bigger objects.  We will want to add a
`SEQ_word64` kind tag for vectors/arrays, which will require a change in
runtime representations.

### SML/NJ Library issues

There are a few library modules that assume 32-bit integers.

  * The various hash-table modules round up table size assuming that the
    size is a 31-bit integer.<br/>
    Files:
      - `Util/hash-set-fn.sml`
      - `Util/hash-table-rep.sml`
      - `Util/hash-table.sml`
      - `Util/hash-set-fn.sml`

  * The `Rand` and `Random` modules are 31-bit specific.<br/>
    Files:
      - `Util/rand.sml`
      - `Util/random.sml`

### General discussion

**[DONE]** Ideally, we can devise a single way to parameterize the compiler on target sizes
from front to back.

It would also be nice to address support for 32-bit floats at the same time, since
many of the same parts of the compiler will need to be touched.
